HOUSTON — What happens to a party after Rick Perry heads toward the exit and Ted Cruz walks in the door?

The answer will play out for the first time in Texas on Tuesday in a primary election that has been called a “primary race on steroids.” It is the result of the two recent seismic shifts in the Texas Republican landscape: Mr. Perry’s decision to step down after serving longer than any other governor in state history and Mr. Cruz’s rise to power as a senator, which upended the establishment and pushed the party’s political center of gravity even farther to the right.

The result is an agitated, high-decibel free-for-all in a state that has long served as a national laboratory for Republican ideas and leaders.

Mr. Perry’s announcement in July that he would not seek a fourth term has caused extraordinary turnover, as Republican officeholders try to trade in old jobs for more powerful ones, or retire, in a state where Republicans hold every statewide elected office.

And after Mr. Cruz’s successful insurgent Senate campaign in 2012 against Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, the well-financed candidate of the party establishment, the primary races have taken on a no-rules tenor amid a barrage of overheated language, fiery attack ads and accusations against candidates that range from hiring illegal immigrants to supporting a bill to rename a portion of a Dallas Interstate the President Barack Obama Freeway.

Photo
Launch media viewer
Greg Abbott, the Texas attorney general, is seen as the leading Republican candidate for governor. Credit Rod Aydelotte/The Waco Tribune-Herald, via Associated Press
The cast of characters includes George P. Bush, the nephew of former President George W. Bush, who combines Hispanic heritage with conservative politics in his race for land commissioner, and State Senator Glenn Hegar, who posted an Internet ad that played up his endorsement by the National Rifle Association and showed him firing a fully automatic M-16 rifle. Mr. Hegar is running for comptroller, the state’s chief financial officer.

“The mailboxes are full,” said Ted Delisi, a Republican strategist in Austin who was the national field director for Mr. Perry’s 2012 presidential campaign. “The TV airwaves are full. It’s open-mike night in Texas politics.”

It was impossible to know whether Mr. Perry’s impending departure or Mr. Cruz’s noisy arrival has had the biggest impact.

With Mr. Perry vacating his seat, the attorney general leaving his post to run for governor, the comptroller retiring and other offices being left up for grabs, this is the first time since 1998 that five of the six top statewide executive positions are open. If Mr. Dewhurst loses his bid for re-election — he will most likely find himself in a May runoff after the votes are counted Tuesday — it will be the first time in more than a century that all six jobs have new occupants, said Mark P. Jones, a political-science professor at Rice University.

Mr. Cruz’s victory has inspired other Texas Republicans to veer sharply right and to disregard the notion that they have to wait their turn for higher office. Mr. Delisi called it “the Cruz effect.”

“Texas politics has been defined by very careful, plodding and patient down-ballot officeholders,” said Mr. Delisi, a consultant to State Representative Dan Branch, a Republican who is running for attorney general. “Ted Cruz completely turned that on its ear. You can have a lawyer in his 40s upset the food chain and jump to a United States Senate seat.”

Nationally, the main focus on Texas has been the governor’s race, in which Attorney General Greg Abbott seems certain to face State Senator Wendy Davis as his Democratic opponent. But in Texas, most of the attention has been on the Republican primaries.

Photo
Launch media viewer
George P. Bush is running for land commissioner. Credit Michael Stravato for The New York Times
Candidates for state offices and the seat held by Texas’ senior senator, John Cornyn, who is being challenged by seven fellow Republicans, have appealed to the grass-roots conservatives and Tea Party activists who make up the bulk of the Republican primary electorate. Those appeals have steered the party from the center with tough talk of guns and God and of cracking down on abortion, illegal immigration, same-sex marriage and the Obama administration.

The decision by Mr. Abbott to campaign with the rock musician Ted Nugent, who had earlier called Mr. Obama a “subhuman mongrel,” was seen by some as one of the dangers to mainstream Republicans of catering to the far right. Mr. Nugent reluctantly apologized for the words, but no Republicans suggested that he was an unacceptable face for the party.

One of Mr. Cornyn’s Republican rivals, Chris Mapp, told The Dallas Morning News that South Texas ranchers should be allowed to shoot anyone who illegally crossed the border onto their property, and he referred to illegal immigrants as “wetbacks.” Mr. Mapp, a businessman from the Gulf Coast town of Port O’Connor, told The San Antonio Express-News that uttering “wetbacks” was as “normal as breathing air in South Texas.” He later said the papers had distorted his comments and took to his Facebook page to say that although he was not politically correct, the country needed “straight talk, and I think we have not had any for a long time.”

Mr. Cornyn’s main challenger — Representative Steve Stockman, a Texas firebrand — has been selling bags that he calls “the official Obama barf bag” for $10 each to raise money for his campaign. Mr. Stockman has made few public appearances and granted few interviews in what has become a bizarre campaign. “It’s a little bit like an Andy Kaufman prank,” Evan Smith, the editor in chief of The Texas Tribune, said on MSNBC, referring to the performance artist from the 1970s and 1980s.

Even the races for the state’s more sedate offices have not been immune from the far-right influence. Another Republican, Sid Miller, an agriculture commissioner candidate, named Mr. Nugent his campaign treasurer and promoted their ties even after the controversy over the remark about the president.

Analysts agreed that the moderate Texas Republican, a political species long on life support, particularly after Mr. Cruz defeated Mr. Dewhurst, has been rendered all but dead. One conservative group labeled Mr. Dewhurst — who helped pass some of the toughest abortion restrictions in the country — a “liberal politician.” Mr. Stockman also called Mr. Cornyn a liberal.

“There’s been a whole lot more animosity, and a whole lot more bickering, and a whole lot more everything this time,” said Chuck Hopson, who switched to the Republican Party while serving in the State House in 2009 and lost his seat in 2012. “This is not the party of Ronald Reagan anymore, I’ll tell you that. I don’t know who it is the party of. I think when I was a Democrat, I was a far-right Democrat, and when I was a Republican, I was a moderate Republican, and right now neither one of those are electable.”

Jim McGrath, a Republican strategist in Houston who was a spokesman for Gov. George W. Bush’s re-election campaign in 1998, marveled at how the political climate had changed although the same party remained in power. Mr. Bush was known for working with — and befriending — Democrats to pass key legislation as governor, a skill that helped him win endorsements in 1998 from top Democrats including the powerful lieutenant governor, Bob Bullock.

Working with Democrats and uttering the word ‘compromise’ would be the death knell for any Republican candidate running in Texas today,” Mr. McGrath said. “We’re seeing a new generation of statewide leadership taking shape in some races, and at least in terms of the primary process it’s kind of a rush to the far right. The rhetoric of the Tea Party does not square with the reality of governing. You have to be able to talk across the aisle.
